# Binary Numbers

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Possible cover topics:
> - Binary Arithmetic Operations
>   - Add
>   - Subtract
>   - Multiply
> - Fixed and Floating-point Binary
>   - Representing real numbers
>   - Two's compliment
>   - Fixed-point binary representations
>   - Floating-point binary representations
>   - Floating-point binary

<details>

<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

1. [Binary Arithmetic](#binary-arithmetic)
    - [Addition](#addition)
    - [Subtraction](#subtraction)
    - [Multiplication](#multiplication)
2. [Real Numbers in Binary](#real-numbers-in-binary)
    - [Fixed-point Binary Representation](#fixed-point-binary-representation)
    - [Floating-point Binary Representation](#floating-point-binary-representation)

</details>

***

## Binary Arithmetic

> [!NOTE]
> Key Terminologies:
> - **Least Significant Bit (LSB)**: The rightmost bit in a binary number; represents the smallest power of 2 (i.e.: $2^{0}$).
> - **Most Significant Bit (MSB)**: The leftmost bit in a binary number; represents the highest power of 2 (e.g.: $2^{7}$ in a 8 bits binary number).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Overflow Errors**:<br />
> An *overflow error* occurs when the result of a binary arithmetic operation exceeds the maximum value that the system can store.

### Addition

| Operation | Result |
| --------- | -----: |
| 0 + 0     | 0      |
| 0 + 1     | 1      |
| 1 + 0     | 1      |
| 1 + 1     | 10     |
| 1 + 1 + 1 | 11     |

### Subtraction

> [!NOTE]
> **Key Terminologies**:
> - **Minuend**: The number from which another number is being subtracted.
> - **Subtrahend**: The number being subtracted from the minuend.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> ***Two's complement** is the most common method for representing negative numbers in binary due to its efficiency in arithmetic operations. Ths MSB acts as a sign bit (0 for positive, 1 for negative).*<br />
> <details>
> 
> <summary>Convert to two's complement (Example)</summary>
> 
> 1. Absolute value in binary ($100_{10} = 01100100_{2}$)
> 2. Invert the bits except the first $1$ from the LSB ($01100100_{2} \to 10011100_{2}$)
> 
> </details>

<br />

1. Convert the subtrahend to two's complement.
2. Add the two's complement of the subtrahend to the minuend.
3. If there's a carry (positive result), ignore it.

### Multiplication

> [!NOTE]
> Key Terminologies:
> - **Multiplicand**: The number being multiplied.
> - **Multiplier**: The number by which the multiplicand is multiplied.
> - **Partial Product**: The result of multiplying each digit of the multiplier by each digit of the multiplicand.

| Operation    | Result |
| ------------ | -----: |
| $0 \times 0$ | 0      |
| $0 \times 1$ | 0      |
| $1 \times 0$ | 0      |
| $1 \times 1$ | 1      |

1. Write the multiplicand and multiplier.
2. Multiply the LSB of the multiplier with all digits of the multiplicand.
3. Add a placeholder (0) before multiplying the next higher-order digit.
4. Repeat until the MSB is reached.
5. Add the partial products using binary addition.
6. Check against decimal values.

## Real Numbers in Binary

> [!NOTE]
> The broadest categories of numbers in mathematics, including both rational (e.g. $\frac{1}{3}$, $0.5$, $-2$) and irrational (e.g. $\pi$, $\sqrt{2}$, $e$) numbers.

### Fixed-point Binary Representation

> [!NOTE]
> To represent integer numbers in binary, $2^{0}$ was used as the LSB and $2^{n - 1}$ was used as the MSB, where $n$ represents the number of bits used in the system.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> In **fixed-point binary**, it can be extended to include negative exponents, starting at $2^{-1}$ and ending at $2^{-n}$.

**Steps**:<br />
1. Write out the column headings, placing the decimal point between the fourth and fifth bit.
2. Conver the non-fractional part to binary.
3. Convert the fractional part to binary.

### Floating-point Binary Representation

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Floating-point binary** is comparable to scentific notation in that a number is represented as a *mantissa* and *exponent*. In floating-point binary, the number of bits are allocated to the mantissa and the remaining bits form the exponent.

**Floating-Point Binary to Decimal**:<br />
1. In a 8-bit system, we can assign 5-bit to the mantissa and 3-bit to the exponent. (Or in 12-bit system, assign 8-bit to the mantissa and 3-bit to the exponent.)

> [!CAUTION]
> Both the mantissa and exponent are stored in <ins>two's complement</ins> binary.

2. Convert the exponent to decimal.
3. Move the binary point the number of positions specified by the exponent. (Positive exponent: move right; Negative exponent: move left)
4. Treat the number as fixed-point binary

**Decimal to Floating-Point Binary** (Example: $14.25_{10}$):

1. Convert decimal number to fixed-point format.
    - $14_{10} = 01110_{2}$
    - $0.25_{10} = .01_{2}$
    - $14.25_{10} = 01110.01_{2}$
2. *Normalise*: Shift the decimal to between the first two digits to get the exponent.
    - $01110.01_{2} \overset{4}{\leftarrow} 0.111001_{2}$
    - Exponent is $4$ or $0100_{2}$
3. Represent the number $14.25_{10}$ using 8-bit mantissa and 4-bit exponent.
    - Mantissa:<br />

    | $-2^{0}$ |  .  | $2^{-1}$ | $2^{-2}$ | $2^{-3}$ | $2^{-4}$ | $2^{-5}$ | $2^{-6}$ | $2^{-7}$ |
    | :------: | :-: | :------: | :------: | :------: | :------: | :------: | :------: | :------: |
    | 0        | .   | 1        | 1        | 1        | 0        | 0        | 1        | 0        |

    - Exponent:<br />

    | $-2^{3}$ | $2^{2}$ | $2^{1}$ | $2^{0}$ |
    | :------: | :-----: | :-----: | :-----: |
    | 0        | 1       | 0       | 0       |
